The Sundara Kanda, also known as “Book Of Beauty", is the fifth book of the Ramayana. It is considered the heart and soul of the Ramayana, depicting the heroic adventures of Hanuman, the monkey god, as he embarks on a memorable journey to Lanka to find Sita, Lord Rama's consort. 

Sundara Kanda begins with the arrival of Hanuman in Lanka, the magnificent kingdom ruled by the mighty demon king Ravana. Lord Rama, along with his loyal army of Vanaras, sent Hanuman as a messenger to search for Sita and bring her comfort. The city of Lanka was shone by buildings equalling autumnal clouds. When Hanuman arrived in Lanka, marvelled at its grandeur, with a sound resembling that of an ocean, it was served by ocean breeze. It was filled with well fed and mighty armies, the capital of Kubera. It had elephants positioned at archways and had white gates and streets showcasing its power and wealth. 

To avoid being noticed, Hanuman cleverly changed his size and used a tiny form that allowed him to move stealthily around the city. He skilfully navigated the crowded streets, dodging demonic guards and hiding from their watchful eyes. Descriptions of Lanka's architectural wonders and clear images of its bustling streets will immerse the reader in the city's ravishing beauty. 

Hanuma, became surprised seeing the doors which were of golden colour, with platforms of gems, inlaid with diamonds, with sounds of Krauncha birds and peacocks, looking as though flying toward the sky, with auspicious houses resounding everywhere with the sounds of ornaments, equalling the city of, as though flying towards the sky. Hanuma sees the city of anka rendered beautiful by the glorious moon, Hanuma also becomes anxious had not become too able to find Seetha. 

Hanuma saw rakshasas railing a lot at one another moving their heavy shoulders, throwing wild and incoherent words a lot, insulting one another being intoxicated. 

Hanuma neared the house of Ravana shining with the golden hue of Sun, surrounded by a compound wall. Ravana's house consisted of surprising archways decorated with silver and gold, strange entrances and beautiful doors. 

Hanuma saw Ravana's house with protective shields made of lion and tiger skins, decorated with ivory, gold and silver, being roamed always by strange chariots with great sound. 

Hanuma saw Ravana's house filled with a lot of diamonds, having valuable seats and utensils, abode of great warriors, with great chariots and great utensils. 

The great Hanuma saw the wealthy Ravana's huge house, inscrutable like an ocean, like a noiseless ocean, with a roof embedded with great diamonds. 

Hanuman's search leads him to Ashoka Grove, where he finds Sita trapped and destroyed by grief. The embodiment of eternal purity and devotion, Sita longs to meet her beloved Rama. Hanuman reveals himself to her, a divine form in her desert, a beacon of hope. He reassures her of Rama's undying love and determination to save her, and tells her about Rama's noble character, his divine legacy, and his vows to eradicate evil and restore justice. 

To prove his loyalty and connection to Rama, Hanuman presented Sita with a ring signed by Rama, a clear symbol of Rama's undying love and devotion. Overjoyed and full of hope, Sita embraced Hanuman and expressed unwavering faith in Rama's ability to save him. He sent a message to Hanuman filled with words of encouragement, love and longing, a testament to Rama's devotion and undying faith in Rama's ultimate victory. 

Seetha asks Hanuma, who is prepared to depart with the jewel for her head, to convey her enquiries about the welfare of Rama, Lakshmana and Sugreeva. She further requests Hanuma to urge them to rescue her. Then, Seetha expresses her doubt about the capacity of Rama, Lakshmana and the troops of monkeys and bears to cross the ocean. Hanuma explains to Seetha about the strength of monkey-heroes and assures her about their ability to cross the ocean. In the end, Hanuma consoles Seetha by promising to bring Rama and Lakshmana on his back across the sea so that they will together destroy the City of Lanka. 

Hanuma thinks within himself that he should implement strategy for success, open assault with the demons, so as to meet Ravana and his ministers for knowing their designs and strengths. Accordingly, he makes up his mind to damage the royal pleasure-garden attached to the gynaecium at Lanka and then proceeds to do that task. Creating a great displeasure to the mind of that high-souled Ravana, the Lord of the land of Lanka, Hanuma decided to fight alone against many mighty demons and stayed 

Seeing the devastation caused to the pleasant grove by Hanuma the female-demons ask Seetha who that great monkey was and wherefore he has come and talked to her. Seetha replies that she knows nothing of him. Some of the female-demons go to Ravana and report to him that the pleasant grove attached to the gynaecium has been destroyed by a mighty monkey and that the monkey went to Seetha and talked to her also earlier to the devastation. They also report that Seetha expressed her ignorance about him. Then, Ravana gets angry and sends some demons called Kinkaras to catch hold of Hanuma. Eighty thousand Kinkaras rush towards Hanuma to catch him. But Hanuma, with his might, kills all Kinkaras with an iron rod. Getting to know of the killings, Ravana again sends Jambumali, the son of Prahasta to catch hold of Hanuma. 

After damaging the pleasure-grove and after killing the Kinkaras dispatched by Ravana, Hanuma thinks of destroying a sanctuary which is sacred to the guardian-deity of the demons. Hanuma ascends to the top of the sanctuary and after killing the guards posted there, shows his strength by clapping on his arms and by uttering the names of Rama, Lakshmana and Sugreeva in a roaring voice. Hanuma assumes a gigantic form and uplifting a pillar in that sanctuary, he speedily whirls it around and burns the sanctuary by producing a fire, created out of its friction with the other pillars. 

Ravana sends Jambumali, son of Prahasta, to capture Hanuma. Jambumali attacks Hanuma with his numerous arrows. Hanuma hurls a big rock towards Jambumali, but it fails to kill him. Then, Hanuma throws a big sal tree towards Jambumali and the latter succumbs to it. The seven sons of Prahasta surrounded by a great army rush in speedy chariots upon Hanuma, who is standing on the archy gate way. They discharge a shower of arrows on Hanuma. Then, Hanuma crushes all the enemies, using his palms, feet, fists, nails, chest and thighs only as his weapons. After killing those demons, Hanuma climbs up the archy door-way and takes up his position there again. 

Ravana sends Virupaksha, Yupaksha, Durdhara, Praghasa and Bhasakarna the five foremost army-generals so as to capture Hanuma. Ravana explains his guess, saying to those five generals that Hanuma may not be an ordinary monkey, but an evil spirit created by Indra the Lord of celestials and asks them to exert a great effort to capture him. Hanuma first kills Durdhara who initially attacks him. He then kills Virupaksha and Yupaksha, by attacking them with a sala tree. Hanuma later kills Praghasa and Bhasakarna, by hurling the top of a mountain on them. After destroying the remaining army together with horses elephants and chariots, he again in returns to the archy door way of the Ashoka groove. 

Ravana sends Aksha, his own son, to fight against Hanuma. Aksha, along with his army elephants and horses, approach Hanuma and incites him to battle by discharging three sharp arrows. As Aksha discharges his arrows, Hanuma bounces quickly to the sky and smashes Aksha, his chariot and the horses with blows. After killing Aksha, Hanuma returns again to the same archy door-way. 

Ravana calls Indrajit and asks him to go for a battle against Hanuma. Indrajit wielding a colourful bow quickly in a chariot to face Hanuma in combat. The arrows discharged by Indrajit are made ineffective by Hanuma, through his peculiar skill of manoeuvring them like a wind-god. Realizing that Hanuma cannot be slain, Indrajit merely takes him captive by discharging the unfailing missile presided over by Brahma, the creator. Hanuma falls on the ground motionless. The demons tie him with ropes and drag him to the presence of Ravana. Hanuma yields to their operation of capture, even though capable of aborting it, eager as he was to meet Ravana. 

Hanuma sees well-adorned Ravana, who is seated on a well-decorated throne of crystal. He is surrounded by four ministers viz., Durdhara, Prahasta, Mahaparshva and Nikumbha. Surprised to behold the splendor and glory of Ravana, Hanuma believes that he could even rule heaven along with Indra, but for his gross unrighteousness, which pulled him down. 

As instructed by Ravana, Prahasta his chief minister inquires of Hanuma as to who he was and also his motive in destroying the pleasure-garden as also killing the demons. In reply, Hanuma says that he destroyed the pleasure-garden in order that he might be taken captive and dragged to the presence of Ravana, whom he was eager to see and was forced in self-defense to kill those who stood in his way. Finally, he declares himself to be a messenger of Rama and adds that, though he was incapable of being bound by a missile presided over by Brahma, he surrendered to it only in order to see Ravana in person. 

Hanuma narrates the story of Rama, who on command from his father, went on exile to Dandaka forest along with Seetha, who was later borne away by Ravana through the sky over Rishyamuka mountain. Hanuma adds that Rama, while searching for Seetha at Mount Rishyamuka, happened to meet Sugreeva and made friendship with him. Hanuma also tells the story about Rama installing Sugreeva in the throne, after killing Vali and about Sugreeva promising Rama to get Seetha searched. Celebrating the glory of Rama, Hanuma points out to Ravana that if he wished to survive he should give back Seetha to Rama and that he should be prepared for the worst if on the other hand he refuses to do so. 

Hearing the harsh words of Hanuma, Ravana orders him to be killed. Vibhishana, however, advises Ravana to desist from the dastardly act, pointing out that the killing of an envoy is forbidden according to religious scriptures. 

As ordered by Ravana, the demons wrap up old rags around Hanuma's tail, pour oil to it and burn it with fire. The demons tie Hanuma with ropes and conduct him to walk down the entire city, proclaiming to the citizens of Lanka saying that Hanuma is a spy. The female-demons inform Seetha about the burning of Hanuma's tail and making him move around the city by demons. Then, Seetha starts praying the fire-god to do good to Hanuma. In response to her prayers, fire-god makes Hanuma feel cool with his burning tail. Then, Hanuma approaches the city-gate of Lanka, takes an iron-rod from the arched door of the gate and kills all the security-guards there. 

Hanuma, with his blazing tail comes out and flits over the horses in Lanka, making up his mind to set fire to the city of Lanka which is the only work let for him to do. Hanuma burns the entire city, barring the abode of Vibhishana. All the demons were frightened o seeing the blazing fire, consuming their city with its trees, houses and a host of living beings. Surprised to see the city burning, the celestials and musicians (Gandharvas) gain a great delight. 

Making out that the whole of Lanka is reduced to ashes and conjecturing that Seetha too thus might have lost her life, Hanuma begins to reproach himself for his unrestrained exhibition of anger. Hanuma regrets that if Seetha dies now in this fire of Lanka, Rama and his brothers on hearing that report will not survive. While reflecting thus, Hanuma sees some good omens and asserts himself that Seetha can survive from the harsh forces of fire by her virtues of penance and devotion to Rama. In the meantime, he hears of her safety from the lips of Charanas (celestial bards) and feels consoled. Hanuma makes up his mind to return only after seeing her again. 

Hanuma again visits Ashoka garden and sees Seetha once more. He consoles Seetha that Rama along with his forces of monkeys and bears will come soon and after conquering the enemies in battle, will take her back. After bidding adieu to Seetha, he ascends Mount Arishta and enlarges his body making himself ready to leap across the ocean. 

Hanuma leaps from the coast of Lanka and touches Mount Mainaka, which he came across in the way. He advances further and roars at the top of his voice at the Mount Mahendra, so as to bring jubilation to the monkeys awaiting his return there. Jambavan tells the monkeys, who moved by jumps with joy on hearing Jambavan, that Hanuma has returned successfully, from his expedition as way evident from his jubilant roar. Having greeted Jambavan, Angada and others on alighting on the summit of Mount Mahendra, Hanuma narrates to them briefly the story of his discovery of Seetha. Applauding Hanuma, prince Angada, who was eager to hear the story, sits down on a rock along with all others. 

Jambavan, seated along with the monkey-troops, requested Hanuma to narrate clearly whatever has occurred. Hanuma narrates in detail how he saw Mount Mainaka in the course of his journey to Lanka and how he escaped on the way from the clutches of Surasa, a great serpent living in the ocean. Hanuma also narrated about his killing of Simhika, a female demon on the way and also about defeating another female demon (Lanka-incarnate) who was guarding the City of Lanka. Hanuma explains to Jambavan, how he beholds Seetha in Ashoka Garden after a thorough search in the City of Lanka and how he introduces himself as an envoy sent by Rama and Sugreeva. Hanuma informs Jambavan that he hands over a finger-ring of Rama as a token of remembrance to Seetha and that he further asks for a return-token of remembrance from her, to be handed over to Rama. Hanuma then narrates about Seetha having delivered to him an excellent jewel for her head, as a token of remembrance. He further narrates about the demolition of the garden attached to Ravana's gynaecium and about killing of Aksha, Ravana's son. Hanuma further informs about his capture by Indrajit, Ravana's son and his tail being burnt by demons on receiving the orders of Ravana. He further informs about his setting fire of the City of Lanka. He finally narrates about his re-visit to Seetha and his return to Mount Mahendra. 

Describing the plight of Seetha to his fellow monkeys, Hanuma expresses his feeling that it behoved them all to see Rama only after restoring Seetha from Lanka. Hanuma says that even single-handed, he is capable of destroying that City of Lanka with its troops of demons, and killing Ravana, much more so when accompanied by heroic, mighty and powerful monkeys. Then, he recounts the past heroic exploits of Jambavan, Angada, Neela, Panasa, Mainda and Dvivida. Hanuma thus incites them all to decide consciously of a war against Lanka. 

Angada suggests with enthusiasm that Seetha must be restored by them only, after conquering Lanka. But Jambavan replies that it is not proper for them to do like that without enquiring about Rama's intention. 

Leaving Mount Mahendra and leaping ahead towards Kishkindha, the monkeys on their way halt at Madhuvana, a protected grove abounded in honey which was dear to Sugreeva and guarded by the monkey, Dahimukha. When the monkeys started to enjoy drinking of honey in the grove with the permission of Prince Angada, Dahimukha hinders in their way. The monkeys bruise Dadhimukha with their nails and teeth. 

The monkeys enter Madhuvana and partake the honey in plenty, as permitted by Hanuma and Angada. Singing and dancing as if in a drunken state, the monkeys were obstructed by those guarding the grove. The terrific monkeys warded off the guards, nay, they even dragged them by their knees and tossed them up in the air. The guards then went to Dadhimukha, the chief of the garden-guards and complained him of the matter. Dadhimukha along with his followers appears on the scene and invade the monkeys with trees and rocks. Angada thrashed Dadhimukha with his arms and made him fall on the ground. Dadhimukha along with his followers then proceed to Kishkindha to report the matter to him. Dadhimukha bows down and touches Sugreeva's feet as a mark of salutation. 

Dadhimukha comes to Sugreeva and reports that Madhuvana, the grove abounding in honey, has been damaged by monkeys headed by Angada and Hanuma. When Lakshmana in the vicinity enquires Sugreeva about the matter, Sugreeva says that by hearing about the jubilation of the monkeys, it can be concluded that Seetha has been traced out. Assuaging Dadhimukha, Sugreeva asks him to send without delay, Hanuma, Angada and others to him, so as to hear about their efforts in tracing out Seetha. 

Coming back to Madhuvana as instructed by Sugreeva, and craving forgiveness of Angada, Dadhimukha submits to him that he along with the other monkeys is urgently required by Sugreeva. Angada and other monkeys including Hanuma spring forward into the air towards Kishkindha. Even before the arrival of those monkeys, Sugreeva explains to Rama the valid reasons for concluding that Seetha has since been found. Angada, Hanuma and other, monkeys approach Sugreeva. Then, Hanuma informs Rama about the discovery of Seetha. Hearing the news, Rama and Lakshmana were thrilled with joy and looked on Hanuma with a high esteem. 

Hanuma conveys her message to Rama.Rama, presses the jewel for the head, dispatched by Seetha on his bosom and speaks to Sugreeva, telling him that by seeing that excellent jewel he obtains the sight of Seetha, her father and father-in-law. Rama urges Hanuma, to repeat the words spoken by Seetha. 

Hanuma informs Rama how Seetha expressed her grave doubt as to how monkeys and bears can leap across a vast sea, as well as her appeal to Rama to destroy Ravana along with his entire army in Lanka and take her back to Ayodhya. Hanuma further informs Rama, how he resolved her doubt by explaining the prowess of the troops of monkeys and bears, commanded by Sugreeva as also how he brought solace and peace to her from her worries. 

Sundara Kanda also shows Hanuman's insight into the divine nature of Lord Rama. Hanuman mentions the glory of Rama and extols his virtue and claims that simply saying Rama's name can save someone from the cycle of birth and death. Her sincere praise speaks to her deep devotion and undying faith in the strength and mercy of Lord Rama. 

Impressed by Hanuman's steadfast commitment and news of Sita's state of health, Lord Rama embraced Hanuman with much love and gratitude. His undying devotion, unwavering devotion and unique feats of strength and courage make him a beloved companion of Rama and a revered figure for generations to come. 

Sundara Kanda culminates as Lord Rama prepares for the final battle against Ravana and his powerful demonic forces. Rama, along with his brave army of Vanaras, his allies and the gods, advance with unwavering determination to save Sita and restore justice to the world. Sundara Kanda serves as a powerful reminder of the victory of good over evil, the importance of steadfast devotion and undying love between Lord Rama and Sita. 